Karl Marx -- Das Kapital
First Biology Example in the first few pages -- basically, the human mind has not been able to get to the bottom of value-from, whose fully developed shape is mone-form... why have they been unsuccesful? Because the body, as an oganic system, is more easy of study than are the cells of that body. in the analysis of ecnomic forms, moreover, neither micropscopes nor chemical reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both.
Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree of development of the oscial antagonism that result from the natural laws of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws themselves, of these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable results --- but note, this is not a sort of physics... it is much closer to a sort of evolutionary biology.
The ultimate aim of the work is "to lay bare the economic law of motion of modern society" 
Regarding natural laws: "Marx treatse the social movement as a process of natural history, governed by laws not only independent of human will, consciouness and intelligence, but rather, on the contrary, determining that will, consciouness and intelligence... If in the history of civiliastion the conscious element plays a part so suboridnate, then it is self-evident that a critical inquiry whose subject-matter is civilisation, can, less than anything else, have for its basis any form of, or any result of, consciouness. That is to say, that not the idea, but the material phenomenon alone can serve as its starting point. (note: Marx takes Hegel and basically makes his idealism into materliasm....)
On the universality of these historical laws: But it will be said, the general laws of economic life are on and the same, no matter wheter they are applied to the present or the past. This Marx directly denies. According to him, such abstract laws do not exist. On the contrary, in his opinion every historical period has laws of its own.... As soon as society as outlived a given period of development, and is passing voer from one given stage to another, it begins to be subject also to other laws.
This is where biology comes into play: economic life offers us a phenomenon analogous to the history of evolution in other branches of biology. The old economists misunderstood the nature of economic laws when they likened them to the laws of physics and chemistry.
Dialectic presentation: My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, but is its direct opposite. To Heel, the life process of the human brain, the process of thinking, which, under the name of the "Idea," he even transforms into an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real world and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of "the Idea". With me (MARX), on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought. 
He has a quick note on how Hegelian dialectic became the fashion in Germany, but in reality, it calls for the inevitable critical and revolutionary progress away from the German culture... 
Chapter 1: commodities
a commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. The nature of such wants, whether they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no difference. note: commodities have to be social use-values, not for personal consumption... commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or goods. This is their plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodites, only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utiilty, and, at the same time, depositories of value.  
quality and quantity -- every useful thing, as iron, paper, etc, may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and quantity. 
use-value -- the utility of a thing makes it a use-value. But this utility is not a thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity, therefore, is something useful. note: use-values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. In a capitalist society, they are also the material depositories of exchange-value.
exchange-value -- a quantitative relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, a relation constantly changing with time and place. it is an accidental property.
unit of exchange value -- when we abstract from its materiality, from its use-value, its properties, etc.... there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in the abstract. HUMAN LABOR IN THE ABSTRACT.
Value -- abstraction tells us that human labor, the social substance, is embodied in them all (commodities) -- when looked at as crystals of this social substance, they are Values. BUT, the progress of our investigation will show that exchange value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed. a use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it.
Units of measurement: each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of the average labour power of society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. 
PROBLEM FOR MARX: a thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Such are air, virgin soil , natural meadows, 
Section 2: the two-fold character of the labour embodied in commodities
This division of labour is a necessaryy condition for the production of  of commodities, but the production of commodities is not a necessary condition for the division of labour. 
Matter and Labour -- these are two properties that are used to analyze commodities.
Section 3: The Form of Value or Exchange-Value
Tracing the development of money: There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen consists. HUman labour power in motion, or human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some object. 
Section 4: Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof
a commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses.
In Karl Marx's critique of the political economy of capitalism, commodity fetishism is the perception of the social relationships involved in production, not as relationships among people, but as economic relationships among the money and commodities exchanged in market trade. As such, commodity fetishism transforms the subjective, abstract aspects of economic value into objective, real things that people believe have intrinsic value (wikipedia)
Hence, in a capitalist society, social relations between people—who makes what, who works for whom, the production-time for a commodity, et cetera—are perceived as economic relations among objects, that is, how valuable a given commodity is when compared to another commodity. Therefore, the market exchange of commodities masks (obscures) the true economic character of the human relations of production, between the worker and the capitalist.
In that world (the mist enveloped regions of the religious world) the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.
Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate as human labour, the differentkinds of labour expended upon them. 
It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language.
Robinson Crusoe: aware that all of his labor , whatever its form, is but the activty of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intellgible without exertion... and yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value.
Part II: The Transformation of Money into Capital
Chapter IV: The General Formula FOR CAPITAL
The circulation of commodities is the starting point of capital. The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical groundwork from which it rises. 
As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. 
Money: the first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a difference in their form of circulation... MCM vs CMC vs MCM'
example: If I purchase 2000lbs of cotton for 100, and resell the 2000 of cotton for 110, I have in fact exchanged 100 for 110, money for money (BUT WHAT ABOUT CMC'? that could happen too...)
In the circulation CMC, the money is in the end converted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is psent once for all. In the inverted from, MCM, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order that, as a seller, he may recover money. 
Surplus value is the ' in M' --- increment or excess over the original value.
The simple circulation of commodities -- selling in order to buy -- is a means of carrying out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of use-values, the satisfaction of wants. The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value takes place only within this constntly renewed movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no limits.
use values are not the real aim of the capitalist ... commodities are a wonderful means whereby out of money to make more money... 
The buying and seeling of labour power:
the change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be converted into capital, cannot take place in the money itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than realise the pricne of the commodity it buys or pays for; So the question is: where does the surplus value come from?
Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the resale of the commodity, which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form (you sure about this? what if the commodity became more valuable?) The change must thereofre take place in the commodity bought by the first act.... Moneybags buys labour-power ... is to be understood as the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilites existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any description... the value of labour power is the avlue of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of the labourer..  
In short, it is the exploitation of the sellers of labour power in which the capitalist makes his excess surplus... 
the laboru process.... first the labourer works under the control of the capitalist to whom his labour belongs; secondly, THE PRODUCT IS THE PROPERTY OF THE CAPITALIST AND NOT THAT OF THE LABOURER, ITS IMMEDIATE PRODUCER. This is one of the major things that marx has a problem with, it seems.. 
The production of surplus value:
"our capitalist stares in astonishment. the value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced. the value so advanced has not explanded, no surplus value has been created and consequently the money has not been converted into capital.... ehre comes the explotation: "the fact that half a day's labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day. Therefore,t he value of albour power, and the value which that labour power creates in the labour process are two entreily different magnitudes; and and this difference of the two values was what the capitalst had in view when he was purchasing the labour power (I thought he just explained the you get out what you put in, value for value?).. what really influeced the capitalis was that labour-power as a comodity posses the quality of being both a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself... this is the special service that the capitals expects from labou power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the eternal , .... the circumstance that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour power costs only haf a day's labour, while on the other ahnd the very same labour power can work during a whole day, that consequently the value which its use during one day creats, is double what he pays for that use, this circumstance is what the capitalist foresaw... 
here he goes on to talk about was is essentially a sort of efficiency brought on by prolonging the labor process in which the value of the product comes to outweigh the value of what is put into it... this does not seem to add up though... the same effect would happen even without a 12 hour work day... in two days of 6 hours, the same thing would happen?
Capital is dead labour, that , vampire like, onl lives by sucking living labour and lives the more , the more labour it sucks. Voice of the Labourer to the Capitalist: You and I know on the market only one law, that of the excahnge of commodities. ... to you therefore belongs the use of my daily labour power but by means of the price that you for fit each day, I must be able to reporudce it daily, and to sell it agin...." Marx seems to think that (perhaps justly) that the capitalist is bringing about the early death of the labourers.... "What you gain in labour I lose in substance..." This is also seen ni his statement: "Compulsory working to deth is here the reccongized form of voer-work.".... He also talks about children working in lucifer-matchmaker factoies who contract a very high rate of lockjaw contributed to the lucifer...."Dante would have foudn the worst horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture..."
Statistical evidence: blacksmits die at the rate of 31 per thosuand per annum or 11 above the mean of male adults of the country in its entirety... well, how mumch does this stat really tell us without context?
"Capital cares nothing for the length of the life of labour power... all that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of labour power that can be rendered fluent in a working day... it attains this end by shortening the exten of the labourers life.... 
Capitalist do this for the pursuit of surplus labor... there are a few definitions on this, but basically, surplus labor is where the surplus value is made... by a certain amount of accounting magic, this is where the M' prime is...
there are two kinds of surplus value: I call absolute surplus value that which is produced by prolongation of the working ady. On the other hand, the surplus value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour time, and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two commponents of the working day, I call relative surplus value... 
the value of a commodity is determined not only by the wauntiy of labour which the labourer directly boestows upon that commodity, but also by the labour contained in the means of production... value of a pair of boots depends not only on the cobbler's labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread etc.. 
An example of this unusual accounting: If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working day of 12 hours. Suppose that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these 12 hours. Let the value of the means of production used up in each article be sixpence. Under these circumstances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the eans of production, and sixpence for the avlue newly added in working with those means. Now let some one capitalist contrive to double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the working day of 12 hours, 24 isntead of 12 such articles.... The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each article will fall to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of production and threepence for the value newly added by the labour. In my own words: when a labourer becomes more productive and his wage remains constant, his labour produces more but he does not get paid more and thus the overall production value of the articles of clothing is cheaper. Furthermore, this extra time falls under what he talks about in surplus labor (which produces surplus value) "Hene the capitalist who applies the improved method of production, appropriates to surplus labour a greater portion of the working day, than the other capitalists in the same trade. 
This is whre the supply and demand stuff comes in... 
Starting Point of Capitalist Production: capitalist production only then really begins, as we have already seen, when each individual capital employs simultaneously a comparatively large number of labourers; the labour process is carried on an extensive scale and yields, relatively, large quantities of products... large number of labourers in one place in order to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership of one capitalist, constitutes both historically and logically the starting point of capitalist production.... 
There are some fundamental shifts in terms of how capitalist industry works: namely that there become certain people whose job is management... and secondly, the leadership of industry is now a function of capital and not attributes of landed property... 
the power of capitalist production is all about cooperation... the grouping of all these people under one power... "Historically, however, this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carrying on of independt handicrafts whether in guilds or not.

Machinery is introduced to the labour process and causes a few things to happen: labour itself becomes much more efficient so we have the extra surplus labor being added... but it also causes the degradation and objectication of the labourer in the sense that their role gets defined as simply a cog in the machine, doing the same task over and over again..  "the habit of doing only one thing converst him into a never failing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism compels him to wrk with the regularity of the parts of a machine."

This quote is particularly revealing: "It is not the place, here, to go on to show how the division of labour seizes upon, not only the economic, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the foundation of that all engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense of all other faculties, which causes A. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: "We make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens." 

the reason that division of labour in the capitalist system is so dangerous is that the labourers do not produce commodities, which are the form of power in a capitalist society: But what is it that forms the bond between the independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker? Is it the fact that their respective products are commodities. What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in manufactures? The fact that the detail labourer produces no commodities."

This division of labour ripples out into society and causes social divisions: "the same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the workshop, life-long annexation of the labourer to a partial operation, and his completel subjection to capital, as being an organization of labour that increases its productiveness--that same bourgeous mind denounces with equal vigor every conscious attempt to socially control and regulate the process of production, as an inroad upon such sacred things as the rights of property, freedom and unrestriced play for the bent of the individual capitalist."

GUILDS: he rules of guilds, by limiting most strictly the number of apprecntices and journeymen that a single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist... the guilds zealously repelled very encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital with which they came into contact.... *a merchant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commodity he could not buy.*

Machinery: because machinery makes it less physically demanding to work, we see that machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms the principal obbject of capital's exploiting power, at the same time raises the degree of exploitation." Furthermroe, it does not actually shorten the working day: "Hence, to, the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for shortening labour time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourers time and that of his family, at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital...." Concluding thoughts on machinery: "we there saw how machinery, by annexing the labour of women and children, augments the number of human beings who form the material for capitalistic exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the workman's disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of labour, and how finally its progress, which allows of enormous increase of production in shiorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of systematically getting more work done in a shorter time, or of exploiting labourpower more intesnsely.... 

Factory: in order to make factories more productive, the factory itself helps to segragate classes: he people who work at the machines, the people who supply the material for the machines, and people who are attendants of the workmen (who work on the machines)... here is also the class of engineers mechanices, etc, who are the "superior class of workmen".... "To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own movements to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold machines, working simultaneously and in concert,....te instruments of labor emply the workmen... 

Marx criticizes the Factory act: the sanitary clauses are extremely meagre... the educational clauses are also paltry.... 

"there can be no doubt that when the working class comes into power, as inevitably it  ust, technical instruction, both ttheoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the working class schoools. There is also no doubt that such revolutionary ferments, the final result of which is the abolition of old division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalist form of production and to the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. But the historical development of the antagonism, immanent in a given form of production, is the only way in which that form of production can be disolved and a new form established... 

IMportance of the peasant, the bulwark of old society: "in the sphere of gariculture, modern industry has a more revoutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it annihilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces himi by the wage-labourer.... He also has a belief that "all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of that fertility. ... capitalist production, therefore, develops technolgy, and the combining together of vaious processes into a social whole, only by sapping the original sources of all wealth -- the soil and the labourer."

This next section talks about how wages rise as accumlation happens:the composition of capital is to be understood in a twofold sense:
on the side of value, it is determined by the propertion in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means of production, and variable capital or value of labour power, the sum of total wages. On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all capital is divided into means of production and livin labour power.

just to clarify: vale -- constant capil (value of the means of production) and variable capital (value of labor power, the sum of total of wages) and on the side of material: production and living labourpower (relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for their employment on the other. 

value composition: the constant capital / variable capital distinction
technical composition of capital:the material side (production and living laborpower)
organic composition of capital: 

In these categories, "growth of capital involves growth of tis variable constitutent or of the part invested in labour power: a part of the surplusvalue turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional labour fund.  

There is a supply demand relationship: the demand for labourers may exceed the supply and therefore wages may rise... the law of capiatlist production reduces itself simply to this: the correlation between accumulation of capital and rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation between the unpaid labour transformed into capital and the additional paid labour necesary for setting in motion of this additional capital.  If the quantity of unpaid labour supplied by the working class, and accumulated by the capitalist class, increases so rapidlly that its conversion into capital requires an extraordianry addition of paid labor, then wages rise, and all other cirucmstances remaining equal, the unpaid labour diminishes in proportion.... this "law of capitalistic accumulation" has been metamorphosed by economists into a pretended law of Nature and in reality merely states that the very nature of accumulation excludes every diminution in that very nature of accumulation excludes every diminution in the degree of exploitation of labour... 

He concludes this chaper by saying: As in relgion man is governed by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistc production, he is governed by the products of his own hand.

he has a concept of a reserve industrial army tied in with his notion of the surplus population... vs an active labour army...

in the last section, he talks about a sort of myth that capitalists tell themsevles to justify the inequality: "In times long gone by there were two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent, and above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in riotuous living. the legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to be condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brown; but the history of economic original sin reveals to us that there are people to whom this is by no means essential. thus it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to seel except their own skins. and form this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all its labour, has up to now nothing to sell but iself, and the wealth of the few ggggg